if you have any kind of education at all
even if you are a high school dropout
you have your primary school driver
probably at some point you had a
conversation with a teacher a professor
a parent or grandparent that went like
this yeah yeah yeah but they had
democracy in ancient Athens in ancient
Rome oh but that doesn't count because
they had slavery conversations of this
kind at very various degrees of Airy
addition and seriousness you even see
informal Communist Party literature I'm
not talking about the meaning of
democracy in different periods of
history to what extent the lessons of
democracy as exhibited in ancient Athens
ancient Sparta ancient Rome you name it
can and cannot be applied to the modern
world today well it's in Europe Asia or
what have you
the contrast between slavery and the
lack of slavery is really not nearly as
challenging as dealing with the contrast
between polytheism and atheism that's
very very hard to deal with the extent
to which the religious mentality and the
role of religion in daily life in
forming people's attitudes their sense
of public engagement and responsibility
put it this way it's not too terribly
disturbing to me at all if someone were
to suggest that the model of democracy
presented to us by Athens had limited
applicability to our Saturday because of
slavery
slavery was of tremendous economic
significance in understanding ancient
Athens but that that really does not cut
very deep to me but if someone makes the
argument that the attitudes
responsibilities social roles even
education and so on of people in Athens
were so profoundly shaped by religion
that the example for
or worse of Athens and how it functioned
any of those ancient city-states for
just Athens to name one that that
example really we can't learn anything
from that applies to our society
unfortunately that cuts very deep indeed
and the more you know the more
disturbing that possibility becomes part
of the problem is that so much of what
we know comes from graciously sceptical
sources somebody like Aristotle somebody
like foo Siddha T's these authors even
Herodotus Herodotus is more appreciative
of religion than the other two authors a
name but all of these people were really
very skeptical kind of cultural
outsiders with in Athens and the he at
the very least they do not praise the
role that religion had in their society
and to some extent they even want to
minimize it and sweep it under the rug
in giving an overly rational and even I
could say social scientific account of
their society and how it works social
scientific in the sense of the social
sciences this week as we have today now
the antidote to this comes in the legacy
of Numa Denis Foose tell Duke Coolidge I
have absolutely no notes for this video
except the full correct name of this new
Medini who still do cologne which is
without doubt in the top 10 list of the
most important authors in the history of
the modern Western reappraisal of the
significance of ancient Greece in Rome
his book was unbelievably influential
for a period of more than 50 years let's
say and now it is starting to be it has
started to be forgotten
partly because anthropology as a
discipline moved away from those
questions and partly because the
classics the study of Latin and Greek
themselves have just kind of wilted in
there and their importance of their or
their
now new Metheny who still do Cologne his
work on the importance of religion in
Greece in Rome he very much presumes
that his reader is as conversant with
the primary sources as I am or even more
so I read this book
simultaneously with my rereading of
lucidity and Thucydides is I would say
is most important source interestingly
many many many of the anecdotes come
primarily from through Siddha tease to
some extent from Plutarch but he will
present to you a completely one-sided
version of an event in Thucydides where
there's a more nuanced telling of the
story in the primary source and I had
this very fresh in my mind it's what was
really aware of the extent to which Numa
is dramatizing the ancient sources he's
pulling from so there's a really
interesting twist in the plot in the
description of the war between Sparta
and Athens written by Thucydides where
there's an army of Athenians who end up
marooned on an island and they have to
escape for their lives keeping this
brief people and you know they say oK
we've lost this battle
we've more we've lost this part of the
war if it a series of defeats we gotta
get in the boats and we got to escape
and go home or go somewhere get away
from this battlefield and then there is
an eclipse and as the story is told by
Numa Numa Dini first elder collage his
version events he describes this whole
situation entirely in terms of the
Athenians being people terrified by
superstition totally preoccupied with a
supernatural view of the world and that
they decide that they have to remain on
this Beach they can't get in the boats
and escape for a magical number of days
I believe it's three times nine days
they decide that after stay for 27 days
there's a
number in order to satisfy the
significance of this prophecy that the
gods are to satisfy with them that this
this you know this lunar eclipse has
some tremendous significance and all of
them all of them either die or are
enslaved as a result the results are
absolutely disastrous that really was
their last chance to escape with their
lives
this is many thousands of soldiers fully
armed and fully equipped they could have
also continued to play a strategic role
in the war and instead they're
completely wiped out because of their
superstitious response to this Eclipse
now that's one lesson to take from that
story and he relates some a debate that
leads up to this disaster a debate in
Athens in completely supernatural terms
he insists that the question of whether
or not they should invade this island
and whether or not this this battle
should happen
he presents it entirely in terms of
different soothsayers different
supernatural interpreters of science
debating what the gods do and don't want
in these public forms and he's really
making a very hard case he's saying what
we think of as democracy it's not
democracy at all now obviously it's not
secular democracy but he's going much
harder and much further than that saying
nope modern people are imposing modern
secular notions on this roads but even
sticking with this same anecdote of
these defeated soldiers on the beach
there were other lessons you can draw
from this their commander the man in
charge he wants he wants to escape he
wants to flee and it's the men they vote
for it that they want to stay now their
reasons for staying are linked to
supernatural it's supernatural
interpretation of this eclipse of
something that happens this is true
however in what other culture in the
history of the world do the men in the
army do the lower ranks make that
decision as does the majority rule
even in those circumstances the the
beginning of the war as a whole and this
particular expedition the fact that it
was debated and voted on that's already
of tremendous significance and even this
particular example again I could give
details but I think it's kind of
productive one of the sides in the
debate is LPB a days who have discussed
in their videos should probably do a
book review there's a new biography of
LPP at ease that's been written in
English should be interesting to know
more of this okey B Hadees was basically
chased out of Athens for being an
atheist and a heretic alkie be a tease
was a student of Socrates who was
himself executed ultimately for being a
some kind of free thinker an heretic and
so on
if there's one person we know does not
believe in the conventional religious
rites and superstitions of Athens it
must be I'll give you a tease and
alchemy oddities apparently came into
this debate and he says oh well you guys
have your soothsayers you have your
interpreters your augers your
interpreter sense but I brought my own
it's very wealthy see how in order to
have the other side of the debate that
you know it was arranged for some other
people to interpret the portents in a
different way so you know even even
knowing in nuuma the author he's
cherry-picking examples that will favor
his case but even when you look at those
examples these books extreme examples
there's there were other morals to be to
be drawn to this story there was
something really special about a society
where these things got interpreted
debated and voted on by a plurality of
voices that did not happen in Catholic
Europe in the Dark Ages that did not
happen and it still does not happen in
Saudi Arabia today or any Muslim society
or say okay well the majority is going
to vote on this let's bring together all
the citizens and you people interpret
the will of the gods plural or gods
singular and this way and these people
and
obviously also in these situations in
terms of war they did also discuss
strategy and tactics and even economics
the money behind the the war effort and
so and so forth but what Numa is doing
here as they say he's really trying to
provide an antidote to a problem that is
in part in in the ancient texts that we
rely on and it's in part in our eyes as
a readers so just very briefly I already
mentioned this somebody like Thucydides
is already such an unusual such an
extraordinary intellectual secular
thinker iconoclast from his own society
same for Aristotle Aristotle was almost
killed in Athens - long story and
discuss that if it he had to flee in the
end the end he had to flee for his life
so that he didn't end up dead like
Socrates the types of voices that we
that we care about because there were
other voices you could read some other
sources from ancient Athens the types of
voices that we really respect and value
that came out of the society are not
representative of the typical religious
and superstitious values of that society
not even Herodotus who's more
appreciative of popular religion but
it's very easy I remember this when I
was younger it's very easy for a modern
reader to just skip over the mentions of
religious aspects of daily life in
Athens or the role of religion in even
these public forms these democratic
forms it's easy to skip over them the
same way that when you reach Shakespeare
you may just ignore figures of speech
and Shakespeare you know you have God's
blood said it's unbelievably evocative
curse word that comes up and you have
these them we have these you know
religious turns of phrase that reflect
even even that even just swearing
chuckle and you know old this religious
old is in religious you know religious
values and religious statements in
Shakespeare and we kind of don't let
that slow down or change or appreciation
of Romeo and Juliet
Hamlet or any of these other major plays
we just kind of get into the mind of
skipping over their religious content
that comes up actually with Hamlet
specifically that really can be a
problem the plot of Hamlet Theory
fundamentally doesn't make sense if you
don't understand just how now I would
say not just to Christian but even
Catholic a lot of the characters in that
are and that's problem because this time
Catholicism is a minority religion in
England but anyway whether it's
specifically Catholic or broadly
Christian maybe that's more than one
interpretation to play and more than one
interpretation of Shakespeare is no
authority by the way but anyway you do
after you do have to appreciate the
Rover glitch in this place to really
understand them but is very easy to skip
over the mention of people making ODEs
in front of the hearth fire of them
personifying and truly believing that
the fire is watching them that the fires
alive and has a mind and knows their
sins and imperfections they have to
apologize to the fire stuff like that
comes up in ancient Greek literature all
the time it's really there's gloss over
it you may not even be aware of the
extent to which you're just skipping
over egregiously impossible to imagine
levels of superstition views of the
world that again today we can't relate
to at all and numa really draws
attention to that and and says look this
is a society yes hundreds of examples
we're in the middle of a war men would
leave the battlefield and go home
because they had to perform some ritual
in front of a Fire's ago sorry this is
the day when my clan we have to go but
you know no you know there's just a
higher priority and where this has come
up repeatedly especially with the
Spartans the Spartans would stand there
and die they'd have arrows and javelins
being thrown at them and they wouldn't
defend themselves until a religious
ceremony was completed and they wouldn't
begin the march at the start of the war
until the moon
it's right phase and their religious
ceremony was completed like the levels
of superstition I mean war is the most
extreme example because there's fear for
your life like you don't have to be
skeptical to say hey they're already
shooting arrows at us
they're already throwing javelins at us
we got out right back and you know no
you wait until this chicken sacrifice is
done and they've interpreted the liver
the liver and kidneys of the chicken you
know like that's what was about it's
almost all sort of fixed this okay so
it's a really powerful book it's a
really important book and I don't think
this is the last YouTube video maycon I
think I have to make at least one more
easy video discussing it the problem is
the book can only be read by someone who
is at least in my level of familiarity
with the primary sources because the
book is lying to you constantly and that
reflects a very different culture of
what it means to be a historian I had a
colleague in Sanskrit so history of
India but especially his PhD was in
Sanskrit and I remember I was taking
issue with him and taking issues with so
I said look you know this is kind of
telling 30% of the truth and concealing
30% and lying about 30% you know like
how can you and I remember he said back
to me said well the author is making his
case was that it was acceptable to have
a really high level of duplicity in
quote-unquote making your case for the
reader like as if you're a lawyer
presenting a core case where the lawyers
job isn't to tell the truth the lawyer
is to either defend his client or a
thor's on the other side to make the
client sound as as as bad as possible
well I don't accept that now I just say
to me it's it's utterly utterly
unacceptable and it's a real shame
because who today would make the
argument that that numa makes his
fundamental argument is that these
societies were much more alien from ours
than we imagined and not because of
slavery not because it's nice simply
that because of the complex role
religion played in the formation of the
family formation of tribes the tribal
structure within the community in the
formation of the city itself
in politics and that democracy as we
conceived of it he says is not even
really applicable so I'm gonna read you
a short quotation here and this shows
just how how far he he takes it says
quote it is a singular error therefore
among all human errors to believe that
in the ancient cities men enjoyed
Liberty they had not even the idea of it
they did not believe that there could
exist any rights as against the city and
its gods we shall see further on that
the government changed form several
times he mean I went through it went
through revolutions the revolutions
changing the government while the nature
of the state remained nearly the same
and its omnipotence was little
diminished the government was called by
turns monarchy aristocracy democracy but
none of these revolutions gave man true
Liberty individual liberty to have
political rights to vote to name
magistrates to have the privilege of
being Archon this was called Liberty but
man was nevertheless enslaved to the
States
the ancients especially the Greeks
always exaggerated the important the
importance and above all the rights of
society and this was due to the sacred
and religious character with which their
society was closed so of shorten it only
only briefly he is making the case that
this society was not democratic at all
and he's wrong it's a really important
argument it's really stimulating I think
it's a really worthwhile if you've
already done enough reading to
appreciate it to be challenged with the
jarring recognition like for me most of
the sources he's quoting I've already
read like the stuffy scouring from
whatever whether it's do cities or
Plutarch or Aristotle whether he's
quoting it or paraphrasing and it's like
oh yeah
I remember that but like well I was much
younger when I read many of these
sources I never took the step in my
mind's eye to really think what it would
be like to believe that the dead are
still alive and present in the soil in
the city you're living in and that they
are literally attending the debates in
Parliament this is not really problem
but in your democracy that they are
literally present witnessing that
judging that that their vote is in a
sense being counted through these
religious racial that changes your idea
of democracy when the dead ancestors and
gods very different idea of gods when
those people are really felt as a
palpable presence
mino' the animal sacrifice is
unbelievably gory unbelievably wasteful
it's it's genuinely horrifying but
what's more horrifying to understand is
that these people lived lives in a state
of constant fear of dread they were
truly afraid of supernatural punishment
and this inspired them also to
superhuman levels of bravery and
self-destruction it inspired them to in
the middle of the night climb over the
city wall into the enemy's city go
inside their temple and steal the statue
of their God and then come back to their
own City and say now we'll win the war
because we've got their gun because
their God is on our side now this may
seem like a prank you know a frat boy
would play this may seem like a joke
what numa is challenging us with is to
say no it's no joke really take the time
to think about how different the world
would look and our different democracy
would be and how different all these
concepts would be if you really were a
person who with zero irony understood
yourself that way understood your role
in society that way and when I was 19
years old I was not capable of you know
of using my imagination that I said I
say all the time
sympathy is an analytical tool but to
sympathize with the religious mentality
of someone in that polytheistic society
their fears their dreads their bravery
like even in English I mean it's a weak
concept now the idea of the Civil
Service you know what we're talking
about with the tremendous level of
devotion and passion for democracy for
the demos for serving the city in Athens
obviously in large part is literally a
cult of ancestor worship
they're not even serving their fellow
man in terms the other people who happen
to be alive and they say that all the
time in their speeches and again we kind
of skip over it just like religious
pleasantries and Shakespeare all the
time they sing we're gathered here for
all right the spirits of our ancestors
that these kinds of things are woven
into the fabric of these speeches and
you know they literally sacrificed
animals and had augury and interpreted
the movements of the birds and the
heavens before starting these speeches
and then the speeches they're referring
to these these ghosts as very much
present in the ongoing discourse that
you know that civic virtue was religious
virtue and then the concept of what's
civic and what's religious and personal
responsibility democracy it's it's
profoundly shaped by those those very
alien assumptions so guys knew me NUMA
Denis Feustel de cologne I don't think
any of us would feel intimidated in
trying to reproduce the virtues of
ancient Greek democracy in our times
because we lack slavery that would be
laugh-out-loud funny let's just say you
have a department in university say hey
guys you know what I'm tired of this
department being run as a dictatorship
most university departments are most
offices are let's say you have a paper
company we receive what this office we
manufacture greeting cards
at a paper I'm tired of this being a
dictatorship where this one guys have
judged let's reorganize it on the
principles of ancient Greek democracy on
that scale you can do it you could get
out
Aristotle you could look it up and say
okay let's let's get organized guys
nobody would say the problem is we don't
have slaves nobody would see that as an
obstacle and yet I think what Numa is
drawing our attention to is there is a
very real sense in what we can never
have what we can never harness is
exactly this passion this passion for
the city that was in large part this
untranslatable utterly superstitious
worldview that was that was harnessed by
democracy and yet also in a perverse
sense held democracy in its thrall